Rewiring how you look at yourself  Jenny Schatzle  TEDxOaksChristianSchool:
 Ladies and gentlemen, my name is Jenny Schatzel, and I'm here to talk to you about getting the perfect body. Yeah, oh, I heard over here, they're like, yeah, I'm interested in that. Yeah, a little woo, thank you. Okay, now we're, hello, now we're back up. Okay, thank you. We're interested, good. Okay, so I knew this would catch your attention because, first of all, just to throw some stats at you, according to ABC News, the weight loss industry is a $20 billion a year industry. They say there is 108 million people on a diet right now in just the U.S. They said the average person does four to five diets a year trying to create their perfect body. Now these stats are a little, they're actually a little outdated. I think I got this from 2012. So I was really thinking I needed to come with some hard-hitting data, some 100% accurate facts, and where do you go when you need some hard-hitting data? Hashtag Instagram. So I put in, I hashtagged, hashtag the perfect body to see what would come up on Instagram. Needless to say, I can't show it up here. So I said, come on. Yeah. So according to Instagram, the perfect body is a lot of skin, a lot of inappropriate poses, a lot of selfies, and it's determined on the amount of likes you get on your picture. You know, I don't have any 100% research and data and stats that said, that says the perfect body is this height and weight and body fat. But what I do have and what I do know are these people. I have witnessed hundreds of people create their perfect body based on what I'm about to share with you. And today I'm going to share my story. Oh, you haven't even heard it yet. You're that excited? Okay. Here we go. Here we go for the journey. Okay. I'm going to take you back to when I was in high school. Now, not yet, not yet. If you can't tell by this, I'm from Minnesota. That haircut in 1998 was very popular. This is my, I know, right? Where's the whistles? Hello. This is my senior year, my senior year dance team photo. I know, super cute. So 1998, I am in Minnetonka, Minnesota. I'm 18 years old and I didn't get accepted to the college I wanted to go to. And when I didn't get accepted to college, I packed my bags and I drove out to California. I had never been to California. I didn't know anything about California except for the fact it didn't snow here and that's where I wanted to be. Yeah. So I moved to California and two weeks after being here, I called my mom bawling. And I said, mom, I don't look like the other girls here. I have short hair. They all have long hair. I wear sweatpants to the grocery store. They wear mini skirts. I have nothing to wear. I don't fit in. I want to come home. My mom said on that day, Jenny, you wanted to go out to California? You have to stay out there for at least one year. And in one year, if you want to come home, you can, but you have to stay out there for one year. Really quick sidebar. My mom is in the audience and I'd love a round of applause for all you hard hitting, loving, tough loving mothers out there. We've all got them. We all love them. So thank goodness my mom said that because hello, obviously I'm still here. You're going to hear a lot about my mom today. So obviously I ended up staying and I started going to school. I didn't know. I didn't really know what I wanted to do in life. I knew that I loved, I loved music. I love people. I love energy. I am, if you can't tell, I'm kind of a loud person and I was going to school and I couldn't afford a gym membership and I really wanted to take classes and I love to work out. So I got a job at the front desk of a local gym and working the front desk allowed me to take all these group fitness classes. So there was the group fitness director in Santa Barbara, California. Her name is Shanda Fetter and Shanda to me was the most incredible person. She had the greatest body I'd ever seen. She had confidence like I've never seen in a woman. She demanded the respect and attention of a room. I loved her. I wanted to be her. I took every single class she taught and one day she comes up and says, hey Jenny, I noticed you have rhythm. People seem to like you and I really noticed that you're pretty loud. So I want to teach you how to teach. I think you'd be a great teacher. And the moment she said this to me, I have to be honest, my initial reaction was no way. I didn't look like Shanda. I didn't have her body. I didn't have her confidence. There's no way I could command a room. I could not do what this woman was doing. But you know what? I was given an opportunity and so I took it. She did months of training. She taught me how to teach cardio kickboxing, spinning, group fitness and on my first day to teach, she taught the first half and I taught the second half of my first class. The room was packed. I'm standing on the side of the stage. She's teaching the first 20 minutes and all of a sudden she says, all right, now Jenny's going to come up and she's going to teach the last 20 minutes. And I get up on that stage and I'm shaking and I'm trying to have all the confidence I can. And in the first five minutes I start teaching, I start moving and I notice people start leaving. I kept coming back. I kept getting on that stage. I kept showing up. I kept teaching and people kept leaving. One day I'm standing behind the front desk and Shanna comes up and says, the comment card, the comment box is full of cards and they all have your name on them. She starts reading them one at a time. Jenny's too loud. Well, duh. Jenny plays her music too loud. Jenny's not always on beat. Jenny's too loud. Jenny's too loud. We get the point. So as she's reading these cards, I could feel my eyes welling up. I looked her in the eye and I said, are you trying to hurt my feelings? Are you trying to make me quit? Because if that's the point you're trying to make, I'm there. She said, Jenny, do you love this? Do you like teaching? Do you like music? Do you like people? Are you passionate about this? I said, yeah, I am. She said, not everybody's going to like you. Do you like you? At that moment, my life changed. The next class I taught, I owned it. I stopped trying to be who Shanda was. She said, stop trying to be me, be you, whether people like it or not. My class became so popular, it was like a VIP nightclub. You had to wait behind the line to get on in. Yeah, right? It was packed. I'll tell you, it was a party. You guys are fun over here. Yes. So things started to go really well. I owned who I was. You know what? I owned my loudness. Whether people liked it or not, it's part of who I am. I decided at that moment I was going to start to just be authentic because the people who are drawn to it are there for a reason and the people who aren't, that's okay. I also realized this is my passion in life. I believe when you follow your passion, you find your purpose. I followed my passion. Over the next couple years, I went into personal training, I started my own business, and three years ago, I opened my own fitness facility in Santa Barbara, California. Thank you. Yeah, it's pretty awesome. If you guys are ever there, come in for a class. You will love it. I won't make you sit in line. No, I'm just kidding. Okay. I started my own fitness facility in Santa Barbara, California. This was three years ago, so we're not quite to today yet. These are my parents. Aw, did you love that? Aw, they're here. I already said that. These are my parents. I think, okay, greatest people in the world. Yeah, right? Good looking people. And so, I opened my own facility, and this story is actually about my mom, who, in my opinion, is the greatest person in the world. Hello, she created this. Right? Yeah. Thank you, mom. Well done. So, okay, so I opened my own facility, and my mom comes to visit. My mom comes up from Minnesota, and she comes to visit, and she walks in, and the first thing I'm standing there, this is my own place. I'm so proud of myself. I'm so excited. The person that I love the most in this world is coming to see me, and she walks in, and she says, Jenny. Oh, my gosh, I'm so proud of you, and I know I need to lose weight. What? First of all, wasn't this about me? You know, the whole weekend goes on like this, and I hear my mom throughout the weekend, and keep in mind, this was years ago, but I hear my mom all weekend, and she's saying things like, I'm fat, you know, I'm gonna get back on it when I get back home. I've been stressed. I'm overworked, and I'm tired. So finally, at the end of our weekend, I said, you know what, mom? You've done a really great job of convincing me. She said, huh? Convincing you of what? Said you've done a great job of convincing me that you're fat, and you're tired, and you're stressed. At that moment, my mom said something that opened my eyes. She said, I know it's what people think about me, so I say it out loud so they know that I know. What? First of all, you never know what anyone else is thinking, ever, and don't ever assume that you do because you don't. I never once, ever, from the moment I saw my mom that weekend, never once did I think any of those things. I think my mom is the most beautiful, gorgeous, amazing person in the world. But here's the thing. Does she think that? Now you're probably wondering, what do these stories have to do with creating the perfect body? They have a lot to do with it. Here it is. I am here today to redefine the perfect body because the perfect body happens from the inside out, not the outside in. A number on the scale, your pant size, the captain of the football team, these things don't create and don't, this isn't the perfect body. The perfect body starts with three things. One, we have to stop comparing ourselves to other people. It doesn't matter if you want to wear a mini skirt or sweatpants to the grocery store. Who you are is who you get to be in this life. The body that you were blessed with, guess what? You don't get to switch that with anyone else. So we have to stop wasting our energy and our time looking at other people and wishing we had what they had because you can't have it. Who you are and the body that you were blessed with is exactly where you are supposed to be. And who you are, guess what? Nobody else gets to be you. And that is your superpower. The second thing, you have to love who you are and love what you've got. You shouldn't only like you, you should love you because you can't give other people what you aren't willing to give yourself. So self love, self respect, self confidence, why are we looking to get it from other people? It should come from right here. The relationship that you have with yourself is the longest relationship you are ever going to have. Ooh, that's a good one. So you know what? It's not selfish to love who you are. It's not selfish to take care of you. It's actually your responsibility. And the third thing is we have to change our I am statement. I know people who before they've even got out of bed, the first thing they say, they get up, they get out of bed, oh, I'm so tired. Your day hasn't even started. You haven't even done anything. You're tired from sleeping? We are who we say we are. So why is it okay for us to talk so negative to us? You're worried about people bullying other people? What about the bullying you do to yourself? You know, we get up and we get out of bed and we say, oh, I'm so tired. Oh, I'm so stressed. It's gonna be such a long day. We drag ourselves to the shower. We get out of the shower and we look at ourselves in the mirror and all we do, I'm so fat. I need a flatter stomach. I need to change this. I need to change that. Could you imagine if every day you got up, instead of saying I am negative, you started saying I am strong. I am successful. I am confident. I am fit. I am happy. I am healthy. I am worthy. And you know what? Sometimes you gotta fake it till you make it. Okay? Not always do you feel all of these things, but imagine the more you said it, the more you would create that energy, right? Yes! You are who you say you are. So stop bullying yourself. Stop saying you're fat. You're slow. You're not good enough. We're gonna change our I am statement. I am living proof standing in front of you that with these three things, not only will your life change, but your body will change. Now keep this one up. This is me on the right. This is me 130 pounds. I'm depressed and my entire self value was based on a number on the scale. Every morning I woke up, the first thing I would do is weigh myself. And if I gained weight, it was gonna be a terrible day. And if I lost weight, then it was gonna be a good day. That scale didn't tell me how loving, caring, passionate, none of that. Yet I let that number on the scale have all the power in my life. That's me at 130 pounds. This is me six or seven months ago over the summer back in Minnesota on my brother's boat. That's what I call my I am awesome power stance. It's a good one, huh? You guys can use it. So this person on the boat, every morning she wakes up, she doesn't step on a scale, she writes her I am statements. I'm strong, I'm successful, I am loud and I'm proud of it. So the person on the right is 130 pounds. The person on the left is 145 pounds. So if you're a little slow in mass, I'm 15 pounds heavier in that swimsuit. Right? Thank you. You wanna know how to create the perfect body? You already have it. You have to own it, you have to live it, and you have to love it. So here's what we're gonna do. Everybody stand up. Okay, really quick, even before that, everybody turn to your right and left and give them a big hand. All right. Here's what we're gonna do. Now you're ready for it. For today, we're all gonna stick with the same one, but from here on out, we are creating our own I am statement. But today, this is it. When I say I am, you yell awesome. Are you ready for it? Are you ready for it? All right, let's see how this goes. Here we go, here we go. I am!