This Is Not Your Practice Life  AJ Leon  TEDxFargo:
 In 1953, the United Fruit Company, the first ever truly multinational organization in the world, hired a New York based consultant named Edward Bernays to successfully overthrow the government of Guatemala. Now the reason they wanted to do this is because the newly elected president Jacobo R. Benz threatened to remove all concessions and actually make the behemoth pay taxes for the very first time. Now because United Fruit owns 70% of all the private land in Guatemala and 75% of all the trade including the phone lines, the power stations, most of the roads, and the seaport, this represented a massive blow to their profit margins. So heinous was their activity in Central America that they later rebranded to Chiquita Banana. So how was Bernays actually able to pull this stunt off? I mean he was actually just a PR guy from Madison Avenue. Bernays employed the principles of indirection. First thing he did is call his buddy at the New York Times and plant a story that Jacobo R. Benz, the president of Guatemala, was a communist. He wasn't. He stated FDR as one of his heroes. But this created a red flag at a newly formed government agency that Bernays had been tipped off about, the Central Intelligence Agency, which was tasked with fighting communism around the world. The CIA then contacted the only Americans in Guatemala and those with the most to lose, the United Fruit Company. What followed was a war of complete and unmitigated misdirection. Bernays, the United Fruit Company, and the CIA recruited a phony leader and a phony militia on the streets of New Orleans, armed them, and sailed them in United Fruit boats to the coast of Guatemala. They then hired exiled Guatemalan newspapermen to plant stories about the impending revolution. And in a very Orson Welles-like move, they even hired sound engineers to produce what was called in CIA documentation, terror broadcast, with feared phony newsmen in the field of war, guns blazing by them, bullets blazing by their head, talking about this revolutionary force, this fictitious revolutionary force, that was slowly coming more and closer and closer to the Capitol. Now this so mortified the people of Guatemala that they actually started supporting this phony rebellion. Now this entire quixotic episode ends with Jacobo Arbenz hauled up in his presidential palace with a few of the boys that were still left with him there, and the CIA planting industrial speakers all around downtown and all around the town center to blast out the sounds of war, bombs going off, Kalashnikovs going off, men screaming to make him feel like at every moment, at every hour, he's being encroached upon more and more and more. In the early morning, when the sound stopped, Jacobo Arbenz piled into a car, drove down to the airport, and left the country of his birth for the very last time. And the United Fruit Company got to keep and maintain its profit margins. Now the reason United Fruit hired Bernays in the first place was because of a book he published in 1928, heavily influenced by his uncle, a guy by the name of Sigmund Freud, modestly entitled Propaganda. In his book, Bernays states, if we truly understand the mechanisms and the motives of the group mind, is it not possible to control and regiment the masses according to our will without them knowing about it. Another big fan of Bernays work was this guy, Joseph Goebbels, Reich Minister of Propaganda for Nazi Germany, who said that Bernays work had a profound influence on his own. Now the funny thing about the book Propaganda is with less of a manifesto for Bernays and more of a volume of case studies of his work with his many clients around the nation. Now if you were able to sum up Bernays work and ideology in just one line, it would be this. The conscious and intelligent manipulation of the organized habits and opinions of the masses is an important element in democratic society. Now those who manipulate this unseen mechanism of society constitute, quote, an invisible government, which is the true ruling power of our country. We are governed. Our minds are molded. Our tastes formed largely by men we have never heard of. Now Bernays is known as the father of modern PR and advertising, but the same ideologies and paradigms that he stipulated govern our society today. Just think about it. You are literally being sold something by somebody at every moment of every day. This computer will make you cooler. This app will make you skinnier. These talks will make you smarter. This man will save the country. This bag will make you more desirable. I mean, where do our ideas of success and happiness actually come from? In many ways, most of us end up being duped. We buy things we neither need nor want. We study things in school we actually don't like. We start and stay in careers we absolutely abhor. We go on vacations instead of adventures. We build huge, infinitely scalable businesses when all we really want is to make a good living while making cool stuff happen and spending time with those people that we love the most. Now the net result of this convergence between a system that beckons us to comply and a desire to be ourselves and to do work that actually matters is that most of us are actually just waiting for a glitch in the system to come and save us. Waiting to win the lottery or waiting to get that inheritance to take that trip around the world we've always wanted to take. Or waiting for that big bonus in order to start that business that we always said we would. Or waiting to be successful enough as entrepreneurs to work on the meaningful projects, the artistic ones, the ones that could change the world but rot in the chambers of our hearts and remain as lifeless sketches in our moleskins for time immemorial. And that was certainly me. Until the day I decided to stop once and for all living some other dude's life. You see I did everything you were supposed to do. I was a proponent, the poster boy of Bernays system. I remember sitting in a Barnes and Nobles in high school when those still existed and paging through a book of degrees selecting what I would study, what I would dedicate my life to based on income potential over time which led me to accounting and finance. In university I got great marks. I graduated summa cum laude number one in my class in three and a half years with three degrees. When it came time to graduate every firm came calling but I went to the biggest firm offering the largest amount of money. I didn't care where I'd be working or what I'd be doing. The only thing that I cared about was how many zeros was at the end of my signing bonus. From there I made vertical leaps in my early 20s from one firm to the next in order to extract the precise maximum amount of revenue from one leap up the ladder to the very next one. This led me to a place that where I was in my mid-20s I had a corner office in Manhattan, a ten thousand dollar mahogany desk. I was making obscene amounts of money and an even larger bonus and stupidly spending it all. But there was this tiny just infinitesimal problem in my life. I hated my life. I was passionless about my work and more than anything I hated myself more and more for trading the hours of my one and only life away for more money at every turn until December 31st 2007. Four days before my wedding my boss calls me into his office. I walk in I sit down and he looks at me says AJ you're getting a promotion and what this represented is even more money than I was making close to double and I would have been at the height of my career. It was literally the apex of the precipitous climb from a 17 year old in Barnes and Noble selecting how he was going to take over the world. I took this news that he had given me. I ingested it walked out of his office. I walked down the hallway. I walked back into my own closed the door behind me went up to the windows just stared over the Manhattan skyline and I just started to cry because I realized they got me. That I was trapped and that I would never be able to walk away from that type of money again and any idea I had of living a life of meaning of purpose of intention of adventure a life that was mine was gone and I had a vision of myself as a 75 year old man looking back at me then at that moment mourning the glory of a life that could have been and I sat down in my chair and I wept and I wept. Until it occurred to me that maybe just maybe I had been conned duped into living some other dude's life and maybe just maybe if I didn't walk out if I didn't walk out the door right at that minute that I was gonna be that guy for the rest of mine and and the pretext and the possibility of living a life that was scripted entirely on my own not my own completely circumvented the fear of how I was gonna pay rent the next month. So I gathered my belongings put them in a box I walked down to the elevator took the 28 stories down hit the street and for the first time in my adult life I was free. Now that day I learned the most important lesson in my young life which is you always have more choices than you think you have and that you can and should rebel and revolt against a system and a society that beckons you to live the life that always wanted for you and that you should never wrap up your identity in somebody else's version of success but here's the thing here's the kicker no Google ads sold me on that life there wasn't some elaborate advertising campaign that Edward Bernays had constructed just for me to trick me into living a life of mindless accumulation. See the thing is there are only two types of emotions that any good propagandist uses in order to get you to do the things that they want you to do hope and fear hope is what the advertisers use a slimmer waistline a fatter wallet a better sex life but they aren't the most dangerous propagandists no the most dangerous propagandists are the ones that actually love you and just want you to be safe. The other day I was talking to a friend of mine who just opened a restaurant and he was telling me that when he left his job to open this restaurant everybody in his life quoted this often quoted statistic that 90% of restaurants fail in the first year of operation and there regaled him with stories of other restaurateurs that they knew that had gone belly up and that were saddled with debt using fear to try to leverage him out of living the life that he always wanted and the dream that had sat in his heart for so long. You see the day that I finally evacuated my former life in order to pursue a life of my own choosing every single solitary person in my life told me that I was crazy that I had made a mistake that I should retreat and surrender and go back immediately or I was gonna fail or starve or ruin my life. Now this wasn't the advice from a nameless advertiser but from the people who love me and just wanted me to be safe and secure using fear to get me to live the life they always wanted for me. Fear is a useful device for sure. Five percent of fear will keep you alive but 95% of fear will keep you asleep and if I would have listened to any one of these people at any point in my journey I wouldn't have traveled to over 65 countries in the last seven years I wouldn't have started a multinational creative agency employing 20 of the most incredible individuals from around the world. I wouldn't have bought this old municipal bus on Craigslist converted it to run on veggie oil and lived in it for two years with my beautiful wife as we traveled around the entire country meeting amazing people. I would have never published my book or started my own publishing house or produced my own conference or designed dozens of artisan products that exist out there in the world today and I would have never initiated humanitarian projects in South Sudan, in Kenya, in Ethiopia, in Tanzania, in Malawi, in Uganda, and in India and I would have never found the greatest city in the world this beautiful little town of makers and creators and artists Fargo that accepted me and made a gypsy like me feel like he belonged for the first time in his life. Listen in some ways I actually agree with Bernays maybe society indeed does demand compliance in fact maybe it necessitates it maybe if there weren't submissive and conciliatory masses filing one by one to tastes and ideas and careers that they don't question then maybe the planet itself would tilt off its orbit and descend into anarchy but no one ever changed the world by conforming to the ideologues that run it. So what do we do? Question everything. Be deliberate about the decisions that you make in this your one and only life sojourn beyond the boundaries and recognize that at every minute of every day somebody somewhere is using their money or their influence or even their love to try and convince you of what you should think and buy and eat and dream and do with your life and recognize that while at times this system takes on the form of television producers and politicians most often it takes on the form of well-intentioned teachers and friends and parents innocently and lovingly and caringly luring you into the same complacency and compliance and conformity that they acquiesced to long ago and the reason why this is so important the reason why everything hangs on the balance of this one issue of whom you will listen to is because this is not your practice life this is all there is and the moment when that ceases to be esoteric hippie bullshit and the pragmatism and the practicality of that statement seats into your bones and you recognize that this life is yours and yours alone and it is your one and only everything will change and ignoring the propagandists be they out there or up close will become much easier now Shakespeare says that all the world's a stage and all the men and women merely players but I would rather choose my part than let some nameless director or well-intentioned teacher or colleague or friend or peer or parent choose it for me and I hope you will too thank you